[Docs] Rewrite 'Trees' section (#668)
root-project/web: manual/trees/index.md

That entry is accessible in memory: you can load any tree entry, ideally sequentially.
You can provide your own storage for the values of the columns of the current entry, in the form of variables.
In this case you have to tell the `TTree` about the addresses of these variables; either by calling [`TTree::SetBranchAddress()`](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a39b867210e4a77ef44917fd5e7898a1d), or by passing the variable when creating the branch for writing.
When "filling" (writing) the `TTree`, it will read the values out of these variables;
when reading back a `TTree` entry, it will write the values it read from storage into your variables.

### Branches and leaves

A tree consists of a list of independent columns, called branches. A branch can contain values of any fundamental type, C++ objects known to ROOT's type system, or collections of those.
Branches are represented by {% include ref class="TBranch" %} and its derived classes.

While `TBranch` represent structure, objects inheriting from {% include ref class="TLeaf" %} contain the actual data.

> Originally, any columnar data was contained in a `TLeaf`; these days, some of the `TBranch`-derived classes contain data themselves, such as {% include ref class="TBranchElement" %}.

Reviewer: > `contain data`

Might be an over simplifications.  Literally speaking the only entity that contains the data  are:
* the TBasket (in memory, uncompressed)
* the region of TFile corresponding to this TBasket (on disk, compressed)
* the user variable (in memory.

And it is always the TBranch that holds the information about the baskets.

The distinction between branches and leaves is "whom" hold the address of the memory corresponding to the user variable that hold the data or "whom" can give access to the user variable address and type information (`GetAddress`, `GetValue`).

so maybe `give access to the data` is more accurate.

Reviewer 2: Done!

### `TNtuple`, the high-performance spread-sheet

For convenience, ROOT also provides the {% include ref class="TNtuple" %} class which is a {% include ref class="TTree" %} that is limited to contain floating-point numbers only.

## Writing a tree

When writing a `TTree` you first want to create a `TFile`
(see → [ROOT files]({{ '/manual/root_files' | relative_url }}).
Then construct the `TTree` to be stored in the file; we will later add branches to the tree.

_**Example**_

{% highlight C++ %}
std::unique_ptr<TFile> myFile( TFile::Open("file.root", "RECREATE") );

> auto tree = std::make_unique<TTree>("tree", "The Tree Title");

Reviewer: The "unique" part is misleading since there is shared owership between the user and the `TFile`.  A raw pointer is likely adequate here as *usually* the user should not have to worry about deleting the TTree (but they can if they want to).

Author: I think the key is:

> but they can if they want to

That means we should use the best practices pattern, and that's a stack variable - which is awkward because of ROOT's memory management requirements, and thus the secon best option is a `unique_ptr`. Do you see a *problem* with that, or is it "just" misleading?

Reviewer: it is just misleading.

{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Python %}
myFile = ROOT.TFile( ROOT.TFile.Open("file.root", "RECREATE") )
tree = ROOT.TTree("tree", "The Tree Title")
{% endhighlight %}

### Creating branches

There are multiple ways to add branches to a `TTree`; the most commonly used ones are covered here.
More extensive documentation can be found in the [reference manual](https://root.cern.ch/doc/master/classTTree.html#creatingattreetoc).

> **Note**
>
> Do *not* use the {% include ref class="TBranch" %} constructor to add a branch to a tree.

> **Note**
>

> > The objects / variables used to create branches must not be destroyed until the `TTree` is deleted or `TTree::ResetBranchAddress()` is called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The objects *and* variables used to create branches must not be destroyed until the `TTree` is deleted or `TTree::ResetBranchAddress()` is called.
```

Further details are explained in the [reference guide](https://root.cern.ch/doc/master/classTTree.html#addcolumnoffundamentaltypes).

{% highlight C++ %}
float var;
tree->Branch("branch0", &var);
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Python %}
# Provide a one-element array, so ROOT can read data from this memory. 
from array import array
var = array('f', [ 0 ])
tree.Branch("branch0", var, "leafname/F");
{% endhighlight %}
<br/>
**2. Branches holding class type**

You can create a branch holding one of ROOT's classes, or your own type for which you have provided a dictionary (see → [I/O]({{ '/manual/io' | relative_url }})).

_Splitting_

If told, TTree will create (sub-) branches for each member of a class and its base classes.
If such a member is a class itself, that member's type can also be split.
The recusion level of nested splitting is called the "split level"; it can be configured during branch creation.

If the split level is set to 0, there is no splitting: all data members are stored in the same branch.
Data members can also be configured to be non-split as part of the dictionary; see → [I/O]({{ '/manual/io' | relative_url }}).

> The default split level is 1; a split level of 99 means to split all members at any recursion level.

Reviewer: ```required_change
The default split level is 99 which means to split all members at any recursion level.
```

Reviewer 2: Done!

_Pointers_

While references `X &` are not supported as member types, pointers are.
If the pointer is non-null, ROOT stores the object pointed to (pointee).

> If multiple pointers point to the same object during one `TTree::Fill()` operation, that pointee will only be stored once; upon reading, all pointers will again point to the same object.

Reviewer: Technically that is during on `TBranch::Fill`.  For example if we have (mostly likely indirectly rather than this improbable simplification :) ):
```
struct SomeClass {
   Other *fPointer;
   Ohter *fAnotherPointer; 
};
```
and `fPointer` and `fAnotherPointer` points to the same address **and** the struct `SomeClass` is stored with split level 1 or higher, then the pointee object will be stored twice (and more annoyingly when retrieving the object, `fPointer` and `fAnotherPointer` will not point to two distinct objects .... hence the need/recommendation to use references (like TRef) or indices instead of pointers.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarification! Addressed.

As introduced in → [Storing columnar data in a ROOT file and reading it back]({{ '/manual/root_files/#storing-columnar-data-in-a-root-file-and-reading-it-back' | relative_url }}),
ROOT can handle large columnar datasets.
In the aforementioned section, we made use of {% include ref class="RDataFrame" namespace="ROOT" %} to write and
read back a simple dataset.
RDataFrame traditionally relies on {% include ref class="TTree" %} for columnar data storage, used for example
by all LHC (Large Hadron Collider) experiments.
Trees are optimized for reduced disk space and selecting, high-throughput columnar access with reduced memory usage.

In addition to the documentation in this manual, we recommend to take a look at the TTree tutorials:

{% include tutorials name="Tree" url="tree" %}

> **RNTuple**
>
> [RNTuple](https://root.cern/doc/master/md_tree_ntuple_v7_doc_README.html){:target="_blank"} is the experimental evolution of {% include ref class="TTree" %} columnar data storage. {% include ref class="RNTuple" namespace="ROOT::Experimental" %} introduces robust interfaces, a high-performance storage layout, and an asynchronous, thread-safe scheduling.

> **RDataFrame**
>

> > TODO: tell people to use RDF, not TTree

Author: We will word that in an even stronger way!

Originally, any columnar data was contained in a `TLeaf`; these days, some of the `TBranch`-derived classes contain data themselves, such as {% include ref class="TBranchElement" %}.

### Appending `TTree`s as a `TChain`

In high energy physics you always want as much data as possible.
But it's not nice to deal with files of multiple terabytes.
ROOT allows to to split data across multiple files, where you can then access the files' tree parts as one large tree.
That's done through {% include ref class="TChain" %}, which inherits from {% include ref class="TTree" %}:
it wants to know the name of the trees in the files (has to be the same throughout), and the file names, and will act as if it was a huge, continuous tree:

_**Example**_

{% highlight C++ %}
TChain chain("CommonTreeName");
if (chain.Add("data_*.root") != 12)
   std::cerr << "Expected to find 12 files!\n";
// Use `chain` as if it was a `TTree`
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Python %}
chain = ROOT.TChain("CommonTreeName")
if chain.Add("data_*.root" != 12:
   print("Expected to find 12 files!")
# Use `chain` as if it was a `TTree`
{% endhighlight %}

### Widening a `TTree`s through friends

[TODO](https://TRIGGER CI!)

> ### Adding friends to trees

Author: Fixed

> Tutorial
>
>  {% include tutorial name="tree3" %}

> Adding a branch is often not possible because the tree is a read-only file and you do not have permission to save the modified tree with the new branch. Even if you do have the permission, you risk loosing the original tree with an unsuccessful attempt to save the modification. Since trees are usually large, adding a branch could extend it over the 2 GB limit. In this case, the attempt to write the tree fails, and the original data is may also be corrupted. In addition, adding a branch to a tree enlarges the tree and increases the amount of memory needed to read an entry, and therefore decreases the performance.

Author: Fixed

> For these reasons ROOT offers the concept of friends for trees (and chains) by adding a branch manually with [TTree::AddFriend()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a011d362261b694ee7dd780bad21f030b){:target="_blank"}.

Author: Addressed (differently)

{% endhighlight %}

### Creating branches

There are multiple ways to add branches to a `TTree`; the most commonly used ones are covered here.
More extensive documentation can be found in the [reference manual](https://root.cern.ch/doc/master/classTTree.html#creatingattreetoc).

> **Note**
>
> Do *not* use the {% include ref class="TBranch" %} constructor to add a branch to a tree.

> **Note**
>
> The objects / variables used to create branches must not be destroyed until the `TTree` is deleted or `TTree::ResetBranchAddress()` is called.

**1. Branches holding basic types**

If you have a variable of type `int`, `float`, `bool`, or any other basic type, you can create a branch (and a leaf) from it.
For fundamental datatypes, the type can be deduced from the variable and the name of the leaf will be set to the name of the branch.
In Python, that type information is not available and the leaf name and data type must be specified as third argument.
Further details are explained in the [reference guide](https://root.cern.ch/doc/master/classTTree.html#addcolumnoffundamentaltypes).

{% highlight C++ %}
float var;
tree->Branch("branch0", &var);
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Python %}

> # Provide a one-element array, so ROOT can read data from this memory. 

Reviewer 3: Maybe clarify a bit this comment.

Author: Discusses with Enric, clarification can quickly go out of control here :-) and we agree this is "good enoough".

The default split level is 1; a split level of 99 means to split all members at any recursion level.

_Pointers_

While references `X &` are not supported as member types, pointers are.
If the pointer is non-null, ROOT stores the object pointed to (pointee).
If multiple pointers point to the same object during one `TTree::Fill()` operation, that pointee will only be stored once; upon reading, all pointers will again point to the same object.

_**Example**_

ROOT's class {% include ref class="TNamed" %} has the data members `fName` and `fTitle`.
The following requests the tree to create a branch for each of them.
As `TNamed` derives from `TObject`, branches for `TObject`'s data members will also be created.

{% highlight C++ %}
TNamed var;
const int splitLevel = 99; // "all the way"
tree->Branch("branch0", &var, splitlevel);
{% endhighlight %}
<br/>
**3. Branches holding `std::vector`, `std::array`, `std::list`, etc**

Both top-level branches (those created by a call to `TTree::Branch()`) and branches created by splitting data members can hold collections such as `std::vector`, `std::array`, `std::list`, or `std::map`.
Splitting can traverse through collections:

> if a member is a `vector<X>`, the tree can split `X` into sub-branches, too.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
if a member is a `std::vector<X>`, the tree can split `X` into sub-branches, too.
```

_**Example**_

{% highlight C++ %}
TChain chain("CommonTreeName");
if (chain.Add("data_*.root") != 12)
   std::cerr << "Expected to find 12 files!\n";
// Use `chain` as if it was a `TTree`
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Python %}
chain = ROOT.TChain("CommonTreeName")
if chain.Add("data_*.root") != 12:
   print("Expected to find 12 files!")
# Use `chain` as if it was a `TTree`
{% endhighlight %}

## Widening a `TTree` through friends

Trees are usually written just once.
While updating an existing tree is non-trivial, extending it with additional branches, potentially an "improved" version of an original branch, is straightforward.
"Friend trees" are added by calling [TTree::AddFriend()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a321f2684de145cfcb01cabfce69ea910){:target="_blank"}.
Adding another tree called `T1` as a friend tree will make the branch `X` of `T1` available as both `T1.X` and - if `X` does not exist in the original tree - as `X`.

Friend trees are expected to have at least as many entries as the original tree.
The order of the friend tree's entries must preserve the entry order of the original tree.

> **Note**
>

> > Care must be taken to ensure that the order of entries in the primary tree matches friends' entries. This is especially relevant when processing a tree in parallel to generate a friend tree, as the entries might be written out in an undefined order (misaligned entries).

Author: Thanks, addressed.

The order of the friend tree's entries must preserve the entry order of the original tree.

> **Note**
>
> Care must be taken to ensure that the order of entries in the primary tree matches friends' entries. This is especially relevant when processing a tree in parallel to generate a friend tree, as the entries might be written out in an undefined order (misaligned entries).

{% highlight C++ %}
void treeWithFriend() {
   std::unique_ptr<TFile> myFile( TFile::Open("file.root") );
   auto tree = myFile->Get<TTree>("TreeName");

   std::unique_ptr<TFile> myFriendFile( TFile::Open("friend.root") );
   auto friendTree = myFriendFile->Get<TTree>("FriendTreeName");

   tree->AddFriend(friendTree);

   int variable;
   tree->SetBranchAddress("branchName", &variable);
   int variableFriend;
   tree->SetBranchAddress("FriendTreeName.friendBranchName", &variableFriend);

   // Iteration over `tree` automatically advances its friend trees.
   for (int iEntry = 0; tree->LoadTree(iEntry) >= 0; ++iEntry) {
      // Load the data for the given tree entry
      tree->GetEntry(iEntry);

      printf("%d %d\n", variable, variableFriend);
   }
{% endhighlight %}

> # We still need to work on the parts below. No point in reviewing yet.

Reviewer 3: If this is going to be merged in its current state, please remove this!
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Nice catch thanks!

Originally, any columnar data was accessible through a `TLeaf`; these days, some of the `TBranch`-derived classes provide data access themselves, such as {% include ref class="TBranchElement" %}.

### Baskets, clusters and the tree header

Every branch or leaf stores the data for its entries in buffers of a size that can be specified during branch creation (default: 32000 bytes).
Once the buffer is full, it gets compressed; the compressed buffer is called _basket_.
These baskets are written into the ROOT file.
Branches with more data per tree entry will fill more baskets than branches with less data per tree entry.
Conversely, baskets can hold many tree entries if their branch stores only a few bytes per tree entry.
This means that generally, all baskets - also of different branches - will contain data of different tree entry ranges.

To allow more efficient pre-fetching and better chunking of tree data stored in ROOT files, TTree groups baskets into clusters, for a defined range of tree entry indices.
Trees will close baskets that are not yet full when reaching the tree entry at a cluster boundary.

> TTree finds the baskets for a given entry for a given branch by means of a header stored to file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
TTree finds the baskets for a given entry for a given branch by means of a header stored in the file.
```

Conversely, baskets can hold many tree entries if their branch stores only a few bytes per tree entry.
This means that generally, all baskets - also of different branches - will contain data of different tree entry ranges.

To allow more efficient pre-fetching and better chunking of tree data stored in ROOT files, TTree groups baskets into _clusters_.

> A cluster contains all the data of a given event range.

Reviewer 2: Is it ok to talk about `event range` when so far we've talked about `entries` ?

Author: Fixed thanks!

### `TNtuple`, the high-performance spread-sheet

For convenience, ROOT also provides the {% include ref class="TNtuple" %} class which is a tree whose branches contain only numbers of type `float`, one per tree entry.

> It derives from {% include ref class="TTree" %} and is constructued with a `;` separated list of column names.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It derives from {% include ref class="TTree" %} and is constructed with a list of column names separated by `:`.
```

If the split level is set to 0, there is no splitting: all data members are stored in the same branch.
Data members can also be configured to be non-split as part of the dictionary; see → [I/O]({{ '/manual/io' | relative_url }}).
The default split level of 99 means to split all members at any recursion level.

_Pointers_

While references `X &` are not supported as member types, pointers are.
If the pointer is non-null, ROOT stores the object pointed to (pointee).

> If multiple pointers within the same branch point to the same object during one `TBranch::Fill()` operation (as invoked by `TTree::Fill()`), that pointee will only be stored once; upon reading, all pointers will again point to the same object.

Author: Done

> For the general case, indices into object collections could be persistified instead of pointers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the general case, indices into object collections could be persisted instead of pointers.
```

Reviewer 2: Persistify is actually the transitive verb here, so we think it's ok.

> When writing a {% include ref class="TTree" %} to a ROOT file and if the ROOT file size reaches the value stored in the [TTree::GetMaxTreeSize()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#aca38baf017a203ddb3119a9ab7283cd9){:target="_blank"}, the current ROOT file is closed and a new ROOT file is created. If the original ROOT file is named `myfile.root`, the subsequent ROOT files are named `myfile_1.root`, `myfile_2.root`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When filling a {% include ref class="TTree" %} into a ROOT file and if the ROOT file size reaches the value stored in the [TTree::GetMaxTreeSize()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#aca38baf017a203ddb3119a9ab7283cd9){:target="_blank"}, the current ROOT file is closed and a new ROOT file is created. If the original ROOT file is named `myfile.root`, the subsequent ROOT files are named `myfile_1.root`, `myfile_2.root`, etc.
```

Reviewer 2: We rephrased this, we think it makes more sense now.

> _Autosave_

Reviewer: We should consider adding text about `AutoFlush` and clusters around here.

Author: Addressed

To read a tree, you need to associate your variables with the tree's branches, as when writing.
When loading a tree entry, the tree will set the variables to the branch's value as read from the storage.
That is done by calling [`TTree::SetBranchAddress()`](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a39b867210e4a77ef44917fd5e7898a1d):

_**Example**_

{% highlight C++ %}
std::unique_ptr<TFile> myFile( TFile::Open("file.root") );
auto tree = myFile->Get<TTree>("TreeName");

int variable;
tree->SetBranchAddress("branchName", &variable);

for (int iEntry = 0; tree->LoadTree(iEntry) >= 0; ++iEntry) {
   // Load the data for the given tree entry
   tree->GetEntry(iEntry);

   // Now, `variable` is set to the value of the branch
   // "branchName" in tree entry `iEntry`
   printf("%d\n", variable);
}
{% endhighlight %}

In Python you can simply use the branch name as an attribute on the tree:

{% highlight Python %}
myFile = ROOT.TFile.Open("file.root")
myTree = myFile.TreeName
for entry in myTree:
   print(entry.branchName)
{% endhighlight %}

### Selecting a subset of branches to be read

> You can select or deselect branches from being read by `GetEntry()` by calling [`TTree::SetBranchStatus()`](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#aeca53bcd4482de1d883d259df6663920).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can select or deselect branches from being read by `TTree::GetEntry()` by calling [`TTree::SetBranchStatus()`](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#aeca53bcd4482de1d883d259df6663920).
```

It is vividly recommended to only read the branches actually needed:
`TTree` is optimized for exactly this use case, and most analyses will only need a fraction of the available branches.

{% highlight C++ %}
// Extract the tree as above.

// Disable everything...
tree->SetBranchStatus("*", false);
// ...but the branch we need
tree->SetBranchStatus("branchName", true);

// Now proceed as above.
int variable;
tree->SetBranchAddress("branchName", &variable);
for (int iEntry = 0; tree->LoadTree(iEntry) >= 0; ++iEntry) {
   // Load the data for the given tree entry
   tree->GetEntry(iEntry);

   printf("%d\n", variable);
}
{% endhighlight %}

### Selecting a subset of entries to be read

To process only a selection of tree entries, you can use a {% include ref class="TEntryList" %}.

> First you inserting the tree entry numbers you want to process into the `TEntryList`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First you insert the tree entry numbers you want to process into the `TEntryList`.
```

{% highlight Python %}
entryList = ROOT.TEntryList("entryListName", "Title of the entry list")
for entry in tree:
   if entry.missingET < 100:
      entryList.Enter(tree.GetReadEntry())
myFile = ROOT.TFile.Open("entrylist.root", "RECREATE")
myFile.WriteObject(entrylist)
{% endhighlight %}

You can then re-use the `TEntryList` in subsequent processing of the tree, skipping irrelevant entries.

{% highlight Python %}
myFile = ROOT.TFile.Open("entrylist.root")
entrylist = myFile.entryListName
tree.SetEntryList(entrylist)
for entry in tree:
   # all entries will have missingET < 100
{% endhighlight %}

## Appending `TTree`s as a `TChain`

In high energy physics you always want as much data as possible.
But it's not nice to deal with files of multiple terabytes.
ROOT allows to to split data across multiple files, where you can then access the files' tree parts as one large tree.
That's done through {% include ref class="TChain" %}, which inherits from {% include ref class="TTree" %}:

> it wants to know the name of the trees in the files (has to be the same throughout), and the file names, and will act as if it was a huge, continuous tree:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it wants to know the name of the trees in the files, and the file names, and will act as if it was a huge, continuous tree:
```
> (has to be the same throughout),

TChain actually works properly with names change as long as it is specified when adding the file to the chain.

Author: Clarified

_**Example**_

{% highlight C++ %}
TChain chain("CommonTreeName");
if (chain.Add("data_*.root") != 12)
   std::cerr << "Expected to find 12 files!\n";
// Use `chain` as if it was a `TTree`
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Python %}
chain = ROOT.TChain("CommonTreeName")
if chain.Add("data_*.root") != 12:
   print("Expected to find 12 files!")
# Use `chain` as if it was a `TTree`
{% endhighlight %}

## Widening a `TTree` through friends

Trees are usually written just once.

> While updating an existing tree is non-trivial, extending it with additional branches, potentially an "improved" version of an original branch, is trivial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While updating an existing tree is non-trivial, extending it with additional branches, potentially an "improved" version of an original branch, is straighforward.
```

"Friend trees" are added by calling [TTree::AddFriend()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a321f2684de145cfcb01cabfce69ea910){:target="_blank"}.
Adding another tree called `T1` as a friend tree will make the branch `X` of `T1` available as both `T1.X` and - if `X` does not exist in the original tree - as `X`.

Friend trees are expected to have at least as many entries as the original tree.
The order of the friend tree's entries must preserve the entry order of the original tree.

> **Note**
>

> > Especially when processing the original tree in parallel to generate the friend tree, the entries might be written out in an undefined order.
> > This can cause the entries of the friend tree to be in a different order than the entries of the original tree.

Reviewer 3: I would rephrase this a bit.  Maybe something along the lines of
```suggestion
> Care must be taken to ensure that the order of entries in the primary tree matches friends' entries. This is especially relevant when processing a tree in parallel to generate a friend tree, as the entries might be written out in an undefined order (misaligned entries).
```

For an original ROOT file named `myfile.root`, the subsequent ROOT files are named `myfile_1.root`, `myfile_2.root`, etc.

_**Example**_

{% highlight C++ %}
std::unique_ptr<TFile> myFile( TFile::Open("file.root", "RECREATE") );
auto tree = std::make_unique<TTree>("tree", "The Tree Title");

float var;
tree->Branch("branch0", &var);

for (int iEntry = 0; iEntry < 1000; ++iEntry) {
   var = 0.3 * iEntry;
   // Fill the current value of `var` into `branch0`
   tree->Fill();
}

// Now write the header
tree->Write();
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Python %}
from array import array
import ROOT

myFile = ROOT.TFile( ROOT.TFile.Open("file.root", "RECREATE") )
tree = ROOT.TTree("tree", "The Tree Title")

# Provide a one-element array, so ROOT can read data from this memory. 
var = array('f', [ 0 ])
tree.Branch("branch0", var, "leafname/F");

for iEntry in range(1000):
   var = 0.3 * iEntry
   # Fill the current value of `var` into `branch0`
   tree.Fill()

# Now write the header
tree.Write()
{% endhighlight %}

_AutoFlush_

The tree can flush its data (i.e. its baskets) to file when reaching a given cluster size, thus closing the cluster.

> By default this happens approximatively every 30MB of compressed data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default this happens approximately every 30MB of compressed data.
```

The data of a tree are saved in a ROOT file (see → [ROOT files]({{ '/manual/root_files' | relative_url }})).

Use [TTree::Write()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#af6f2d9ae4048ad85fcae5d2afa05100f){:target="_blank"} to write the tree into a ROOT file.
Earlier entries' data might already be written as part of `TTree::Fill()`.

If due to the data written during `TTree::Fill()`, the file's size increases beyond [TTree::GetMaxTreeSize()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#aca38baf017a203ddb3119a9ab7283cd9){:target="_blank"}, the current ROOT file is closed and a new ROOT file is created.
For an original ROOT file named `myfile.root`, the subsequent ROOT files are named `myfile_1.root`, `myfile_2.root`, etc.

_AutoFlush_

The tree can flush its data (i.e. its baskets) to file when reaching a given cluster size, thus closing the cluster.

> By default this happens every 30MB.

Author: Applied

You can adjust the threshold (in bytes or entries) using [TTree::SetAutosave()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a76259576b0094536ad084cde665c13a8){:target="_blank"}.

## Reading a tree

> \note **Note**
>
> Please use {% include ref class="RDataFrame" namespace="ROOT" %} to read trees, unless you need to do low-level I/O!

To read a tree, you need to associate your variables with the tree's branches, as when writing.
When loading a tree entry, the tree will set the variables to the branch's value as read from the storage.
That is done by calling [`TTree::SetBranchAddress()`](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a39b867210e4a77ef44917fd5e7898a1d):

_**Example**_

{% highlight C++ %}
int variable;
tree->SetBranchAddress("branchName", &variable);
for (int iEntry = 0; tree->LoadTree(iEntry) >= 0; ++iEntry) {
   // Load the data for the given tree entry
   tree->GetEntry(iEntry);

   // Now, `variable` is set to the value of the branch
   // "branchName" in tree entry `iEntry`
   printf("%d\n", variable);
}
{% endhighlight %}

In Python you can simply use the branch name as an attribute on the tree:

{% highlight Python %}
for entry in tree:

>    print(entry.branchName)

Reviewer 3: I think iteration over entries is performed this way.  @etejedor can you confirm?

Author: He confirms!

{% endhighlight %}

### Selecting a subset of branches to be read

You can select or deselect branches from being read by `GetEntry()` by calling [`TTree::SetBranchStatus()`](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#aeca53bcd4482de1d883d259df6663920).
It is vividly recommended to only read the branches actually needed:
`TTree` is optimized for exactly this use case, and most analyses will only need a fraction of the available branches.

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a simple example?

## Examining a tree

> Different ways to examine the tree structure and content exist, from text to graphics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ROOT offers different ways to examine tree structure and its contents, from text to graphics.
```

Note that not each `(x,y) point on a scatterplot represents two values in your N−tuple. In fact, the scatterplot is a grid and each square in
the grid is randomly populated with a density of dots that’s proportional to the number of values in that grid.

### Indexing a tree

- Use [TTree::BuildIndex()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a3f6b5bb591ff7a5bd0b06eea6c12b998){:target="_blank"} to build an index table over expressions that depend on the value in the leaves.
This index is similar to database indexes:
it allows to quickly determine the tree entry number corresponding to the value of an expression.
These expressions should be both equality comparable (that is, not use floating point numbers where precision might cause the index lookup to fail) and unique, to make sure you get the tree entry you expect.
For high-energy physics, a common example could be a combination of run number and event number:
while each one of them might have duplications, their combination is guaranteed to be unique. 

> To build an index, define a major and optionally a minor expression, for instance above `Run` and `Event`.

Reviewer 2: Says above but the example is below?

Reviewer 2: Should we say they are leaves?

Reviewer: No, they are really expressions (eg. `run%1000`, `event_part_1 * 1000 + event_part_2`)

Note that not each `(x,y) point on a scatterplot represents two values in your N−tuple. In fact, the scatterplot is a grid and each square in
the grid is randomly populated with a density of dots that’s proportional to the number of values in that grid.

### Indexing trees

> - Use [TTree::BuildIndex()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a3f6b5bb591ff7a5bd0b06eea6c12b998){:target="_blank"} method to build an index table using expressions depending on the value in the leaves.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Use the [TTree::BuildIndex()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a3f6b5bb591ff7a5bd0b06eea6c12b998){:target="_blank"} method to build an index table using expressions depending on the value in the leaves.
```

The index is built in the following way:
- A pass on all entries is made like in [TTree::Draw()](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a3f6b5bb591ff7a5bTTree::Draw()d0b06eea6c12b998){:target="_blank"}.
- `var1` = `majorname`
- `var2` = `minorname`
- `sel = 231` × _majorname_ + _minorname_
- For each entry in the tree the `sel` expression is evaluated and the result array is sorted into `fIndexValues`.

Once the index is calculated, an entry can be retrieved with

> [TTree::GetEntryWithIndex(majornumber, minornumber)](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a3f6b5bb591ff7a5bTTree::Draw()d0b06eea6c12b998){:target="_blank"}.

Reviewer 3: Broken link?

Reviewer 2: https://root.cern.ch/doc/master/classTTree.html#a8c77a02a1323019375d273299a2c14b1

Reviewer 2: Also, I believe we never include the parameters when we link to a method, so I would remove `majornumber, minornumber`

_**Example**_

{% highlight C++ %}
// To create an index using the leaves "Run" and "Event".
   tree.BuildIndex("Run","Event");

// To read entry corresponding to Run=1234 and Event=56789.
   tree.GetEntryWithIndex(1234,56789);
   {% endhighlight %}

Note that `majorname` and `minorname` can be expressions using original tree variables e.g., `"run-90000"` or `"event +3*xx"`.

In case an expression is specified, the equivalent expression must be computed when calling

> [TTree::GetEntryWithIndex(majornumber, minornumber)](https://root.cern/doc/master/classTTree.html#a3f6b5bb591ff7a5bTTree::Draw()d0b06eea6c12b998){:target="_blank"}.

Reviewer 3: Broken link?

To build an index with only `majorname`, specify `minorname="0"` (default).

Once the index is built, it can be saved with the `TTree` object with `tree.Write()`.

> The most convenient place to create the index is at the end of the filling process just before saving the tree header. If a previous index was calculated, it will be redefined by this new call.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most convenient place to create the index is at the end of the filling process just before saving the tree header. If a previous index was available, it will be overridden by this new call.
```
